
# How does the product owner relationship with the team differ between software and games development?

###1. Introduction
With this essay I would like to familiarise people to the key differences between product owners in software and games development. Knowing what kind of a product owner your team has could help you avoid situations where you get into a contract that will have you doing extra work just because your product owner is bad at scoping the project. What kind of pro¬duct owner situations work for software development but not in the games industry?  
As Ken H. Judy and Ilio Krumins-Beens state in their paper: “Great scrums need great product owners” [1]. And because product owners have an important role in deciding how the project will go, it is extremely important to understand what are your options when you are in this kind of situation, so you can correct the course of the project.

###2. The upsides and down sides of Software development.
One of the biggest pitfalls in the software industry is when a product owner doesn’t clearly define what the product should do. Ben Horowitz and David Weiden define good product owners as having “clear, written communication with product development” [2]. This is why product owners are commonly lead users of the system, someone from marketing or anyone with a understanding of users, the market place, the competition and of future trends [3]. If you have no understanding of the software development process you cannot understand what the scope for a certain feature would be and when that feature should be introduced. What ends up happening with bad product owners is that they remember a feature that they would like to be added to the project in the middle or even sometimes at the end of the project, and now the deadline is approaching rapidly and your team is in a scramble working overtime trying to add this feature. And all of this extra stress and overtime work could have been avoided if the product owner would have laid out a clear plan for the project from the beginning. In a situation like this what you should do is demand the project specifics to be written out at the very beginning so your team could adjust the scope of the project accordingly.  
And this in turn is one of the biggest advantages and disadvantages in the software industry you are often hired do these very specific software jobs and the finished product has to have all the features laid out at the beginning of the project.

###3. The upsides and down sides of Games development.
Games development is a creative industry and a good product owner lets the creative people be creative as Clinton Keith writes in a Gamasutra article - “Microsoft, our publisher, and the studio we worked at, Angel Studios, left us largely alone to develop the game” [4]. But with the games industry growing rapidly publishers cannot afford to take risks with no oversight over the game. That is why a common solution is to divide up the product owner roles into a publisher product owner and a developer product owner [5]. In the games industry a product owner represents the player and he has to foresee what the market will embrace up to three years in advance [6]. That is what the publisher product owner does, he will analyse the market and keep the game “on track” to reach a certain goal. While the developer product owner is making the game with the team and is there every day to help refine the sprint goal and remains the voice for the team.
But the main thing about games development is you could set out to make one game and end up with a completely different one. The game development process is an evolving one the game could change drastically between scrums and a good product owner will help these drastic changes along and transition them into finished products. 

###4. What kind of personalities suit software and games development?

The structure for software development and games development on the surface is very similar, you work on strict deadlines, you can be hired to work on something and you can choose to make something on your own/with your own team. The major difference is the deliverables have completely different parameters, when you deliver software it either works and has every feature promised or it doesn’t. On the other hand in games development the deliverable could be subjective the goals set out before the project started could have changed while still keeping the core of the product like story, characters. So if you are a person who needs this structure involving clear and defined goals, software development is a great choice for you. Though if you thrive in ambiguity you will be very successful in games development, throughout the project you could be working on something completely new that wasn’t set out at the beginning of the project.

###5.Conclusion.
Comparing the most common scenarios of product owners between software and games development, I conclude that a software product owner is usually a client/a company while in the games industry the product owner is often the user/person who will be playing the game. This is because software has a purpose it has to do something for someone, while a game is subjective on what its purpose is and if that purpose was accomplished, either telling a story or teaching something.

